Renee: It took all day.
It was an extensive amount of tests
they took from me.
They had to dilate my eyes,
take pictures of them,
and they went through all these tests,
just one after the other,
and then they just kept adding more.
So finally, at the end of it, the doctor
came up to me very solemnly and said
You have RP,
which is Retina Pigmentosa.
And they said,
you're going to become blind
and there's no cure for this.
[music plays]
Anne: My brother was on a first name
basis with the tire guy.
He was always getting into little car
crashes.
Carl: Deaf people don't
consider hearing loss
a disability, it’s just who they are.
When I started losing my sight,
I was in denial.
I didn't use my cane.
Anne: My parents took him in.
and then as soon as that happened
and he got diagnosed,
they kind of knew about me.
My mother was watching me one night
and I was at my grandparents’ house
and I was going down the stairs
in the dark, and I was shuffling
with my feet to feel where I was going.
My parents were like, “Shhh...”
you know, and they knew.
Then they took us in
for more testing at Mass Eye and Ear
and sure enough, we had Usher syndrome.
Carl: I became legally blind
and I still had 20/20 vision,
so I thought I was fooling people.
But later I learned, like when I would go
into a store, a convenience store,
and I would get my change they'd go, “Here
you go.” And I still just stand there.
And they are like, “Oh, he's stupid.
He's on drugs.’ No, what it was,
I wasn't seeing the action of the hand
being put out to give me the change
because it was below my peripheral vision.
Rebecca: Recently, some friends and I went
to hear this band at The Cutting Room
and so I'm sitting here
waiting for them to come on.
And then all of a sudden
the band comes on and turns out
they’re over here, and I'm like,
oh, right. Okay.
So I turn around, you know,
and just sort of have to
orient myself to the space.
And then I'm hearing the band now
because I have cochlear implants.
I’m really taking it in and loving it.
And we order food and the food comes
and I realize I can't see my food.
I'm able to hear
because I have cochlear implants.
And I'm so appreciative
for being able to have this experience
and also mourning this experience of like,
‘Wow, I'm now here where I have to learn
how to eat without being able to see.”
And that's the emotion.
Like, that's
just that whole confluence
of all of these things happening at once.
And that I think
is the best way that I can depict
what it feels like to go DeafBlind,
because you can be at once
totally appreciative and able
and also so sad and grieving and knowing
which emotion to sit with
at one time is so difficult.
[music plays]
Carl: When I was about 24 or 25,
I went to the audiologist and said,
“I need more powerful hearing aids.
My hearing is getting worse.”
She did the test, said,
“No, your hearing loss has not gotten worse.”
I'm like “Yes it is!” And we did it again.
What we didn't know is
if my vision was getting worse.
I was loosing the ability to read lips.
I wasn't even aware
of what a good lip reader I was.
I just thought I was hearing them.
Elaine: Throughout my life I had
many deaf friends. I went to a deaf school.
I have many friends who I love.
I have no complaints.
It wasn’t until I went to Washington D.C.
that I realized that my life would be different.
And I couldn’t believe it.
I refused to believe it.
And little by little, I learned more
about Usher syndrome
and how it would affect my vision
and gradually caused me
to lose my eyesight.
Rebecca: If you're deaf, you rely
very heavily on your sight.
When you sign, that's
how you listen to someone.
You know, this is ‘listen’
and this is ‘listen’ when You're deaf.
Your sight is how you process
and take in the world.
But when you're losing your vision
and you don't have hearing,
how do you process and take in the world?
Kerry: If you ask a doctor,
what does my future look like?
When will I go completely blind?
Or what will happen in my twenties
and my thirties and forties?
And a doctor will say,
“I can't answer that.
It's so different for each person.”
And over time, you know,
you still don't know.
What should you learn?
What should you do if you don't know
what your future is like?
Anne: You do have to adapt.
Like right now,
I can still do some large print,
but it can't be too large
because I have such a small
little bubble where I can see.
Eventually I'm
going to have to learn speech or Braille
because I'm not going to be able
to do the visual cues
and I'm not going to be able
to hear as well,
chances are
So I probably will have to use some tactile
sign, even if it's just basic.
You know, I don't think my family's
going to be fluent in sign language,
but, you know,
maybe they can learn the alphabet.
(laughs)
Carl: To a blind person.
If they go deaf,
then reading audiobooks
and listening to music,
and how they gather information
and how they echolocate
to align themselves with traffic, is gone.
To a deaf person, how you communicate
with the beautiful visual sign language.
DeafBlind people put both blind people
and deaf people in a conundrum
because we, as DeafBlind people,
have both things
which neither one of them want.
(laughs)
David: That could be very challenging though,
particularly when it's just happened.
There's so many different variables
in that for the person.
Additionally, though, for the people
involved in that person's life.
Some people come from very big families
and there's a lot of people
who have a lot of different
input on that person.
Some people come from smaller families
where there's maybe not as much of that.
Kerry: That is a very difficult conversation
to have because it's upsetting
not to yourself, but also to your
loved ones to see all these changes
you're going through
and not knowing how to help.
Anne: I think it's scares my husband.
I think it scares my kid.
It scares me a little bit, but I think
it scares them more than it scares me,
maybe because I'm living it and it just
it is what it is.
And I hate that saying, but it is.
(laughs)
Kerry: I want to ask myself
what is the thing that I'm the most afraid of
and then say, okay, now
how would I handle that?
And I think having a plan
and having a strategy
can really help one cope.
Elaine: I was labeled DeafBlind even though
I still had some vision.
I was completely blind
from my left eye.
This did bring about some adjustments
but I remained hopeful and
deeply connected to my identity
as a strong Deaf individual.
Carl: Are things sometimes more of a challenge
than I would like them to be?
Yes. But, you know what,
and I really believe this the older I get,
no one gets off Scot-free.
Everybody has challenges in the world.
Everybody has obstacles to overcome.
Mine is just more visible
to people to watch and observe,
but what sets people apart is how we
overcome and deal with them.
[music ends]